Okay. I'm really glad to see
Generation Data Groups or
GDGs included in
the list of topics
for this course because I think
they're just something
that's a great example
of a feature in z/OS
that just makes
perfect sense to have,
and it's executed in
such a brilliant way,
you'll just wish it were
available everywhere.
So picture a program that
gathers data during the day.
Maybe it tracks problem tickets
that were opened,
or guest checking into a hotel.
No matter what you've got
a whole bunch of data
being generated and
every once in a while,
it's nice to start
with a fresh dataset.
So you're not opening up
as huge thing each time.
So you create a new dataset,
and update the program to
start looking in that.
When you want to look
for an old dataset,
you go through all the old ones
and you find the one you want.
It seems pretty simple.
In fact, it's a pattern that
you see so often on z/OS
that we have a special way
of dealing with
that exact type of situation.
A Generation Data Group
is a collection of
historically related
datasets that
are arranged in
chronological order.
So you have that program
writing out data.
Maybe your procedure is to cut
over a new dataset every month.
Let's say we're in September,
so we've got August and July
sitting in there is the
minus one and minus two
months relative to September.
October comes along, and
here's where GDGs
leap into action.
You specify that you want
a plus one generation
of the dataset,
that moves September
into the minus one slot,
and August down to
the minus two slot.
Now, my program can
continue referencing
the same dataset,
generation zero of
the current version.
If we're going to do
something like compare
this one's numbers to
last month's numbers,
we just specify that
we want to read
from the minus one generation.
All of the logic is
handled by the GDG.
We also get to specify
just how many generations
we want to keep around,
so it doesn't just keep
growing until it
runs out of space.
Here, you can see an example
of specifying a GDG,
where we can add
a new generation,
use the current generation,
or use an older generation.
The example down here is
creating a new generation.
That's called using
a relative dataset name.
Let me ask you something.
Let's say we have a GDG,
and then we submit a job which
creates a plus one generation,
and then we run another job which
creates another plus
one generation,
if we want to reference
the data that we were
originally referencing
before those two jobs ran,
what generation
would we refer to?
Because that data started
out as the current version zero,
it got moved to
the minus one version
when we created the new one.
We ran that second job,
it got moved to
the minus two slot.
So the correct answer
is minus two.
There's an easier more
future proof way of
doing this though.
We can also give
the absolute dataset name which
specifies the generation number
and version number.
Now, when we first start a GDG,
both the generation and
version numbers are zero.
So you get the dataset
name.G00000V00,
which is why people
sometimes referred to this
as the GooVuu number.
As in yeah,
the relative number will
change at the end of the week.
So when you document where
you saw that problem,
make sure you write
down the GooVuu number.
So we can find it later on.
I said you can specify
how many generations you
want to keep around,
and here's where that option
is along with a few others.
You specify the name
of the GDG dataset.
Then we specify the limit.
That's how many generations
we want to keep around.
We can also specify just how we
want the generations
to be handled.
This noempty parameter means
that when the limit
of GDGs is hit,
the oldest one falls off the end,
and everything else
moves down to slot.
This repeats every time
a new generation gets added.
If you specify
the empty parameter,
once you're limit gets hit,
all the generations get deleted.
So you probably want to go with
the no empty parameter in there.
You can also specify if you want
the generations to be
first in first out,
or a last in first out with
the FIFO, or LIFO parameter.
LIFO is the default that
you can specify this using
the GDG ordered
JCL keyword for a job.
That's a little
introduction to GDGs.
I told you, it would be exciting.